
### File system operations

The basic operations for getting around the file system are changing directory, printing our current directory, and printing the contents of a directory. In Julia, these operations are

```
pwd() # print working directory
cd("/Users/sswatson") # change directory
readdir() # files and folders in current directory
```

---

### Packages

If we want to add a package in Julia, we can just do `using PackageName`. If we need to install the package first, we can do `Pkg.add("PackageName")`. Try

```julia
using Pkg
Pkg.add("DataStructures")
using DataStructures
```

This brings the variables exported by `DataStructures` into the current namespace. For example, you can use `Deque` (or `DataStructures.Deque`).

---

Sometimes an import function isn't exported, and then you have to use the dot syntax to access it (e.g., `Pkg.add`!).

---

### Arithmetic

Arithmetic works pretty much the same as in any other language:

```
(1 + 2**3) % 4
```

You can do integer division in Julia with ÷ (`\div[tab]`). What is `7 ÷ 2`?

---

### Strings

Here are the basic string operations in Julia:

```
length("Hello World")          # string length
"Hello" * "World"              # concatenation
join(["Hello", "World"], ",")  # joining
split("Hello, World", ",")     # splitting
'H' # single-quotes are for characters, not strings
```

Let's talk about differences from Python. What's the Python function which returns the length of a string?

---

What operator does Python use for string concatenation?

---

The function `join` is fairly similar, but it's called quite differently. What's the Python equivalent of `join(["Hello", "World"], ",")`?

---

### Booleans

Basic boolean objects and operations look like this:

```
true && false == true    # and
false || true == true    # or
!true == false           # not
```

What are some differences with Python here?

---

### Loops and conditionals:

Loops look this this (no colon):

```julia
for i in 1:10
  print(i)
end

while x > 0
  x -= 1
end
```

---

And conditionals:

```julia
if x > 0
  print("x is positive")
elseif x == 0
  print("x is zero")
else
  print("x is negative")
end
```

### Functions

We can define functions in math notation like

```
f(x) = x^2 + sqrt(y*x^2 + 1)
```

---

Or we can use a block:

```
function f(x,y)
  x² = x * x
  x² + sqrt(y*x²+1)
end
```

This second definition may be a little faster, since it only involves squaring `x` once.

---

`\^2[tab]` gives the Unicode superscript you see there. Note that this is just a character like any other from Julia's point of view; it doesn't perform any mathematical operation or anything like that.

---

We use a semicolon to separate arguments from keyword arguments. So let's say we want to program the quadratic formula in Julia, and we want to give the user an option to specify that they only want real solutions. Then we'd start with:

```julia
function quadformula(a, b, c; real_only = false)

end
```

Now, what would be the first thing we'd want to do in the body of this function?

---

We'd like to calculate the discriminant and check whether it's negative. If it is and we only want real solutions, we'll return a 0-element tuple:

```julia
function quadformula(a, b, c; real_only = false)
  Δ = b^2 - 4a*c
  if (Δ < 0 && real_only)
    ()
  end
end
```

---

Otherwise, we convert `Δ` to a complex value if `real_only` is true and plug into the formula:

```julia
function quadformula(a, b, c; real_only = false)
  Δ = b^2 - 4a*c
  if (Δ < 0 && real_only)
    ()
  elseif real_only
    d = sqrt(Δ)
    (-b + d) / (2*a), (-b - d) / (2*a)
  else
    d = sqrt(Complex(Δ))
    (-b + d) / (2*a), (-b - d) / (2*a)
  end
end
quadformula(1,2,1,real_only=false)
```

---

### Arrays

Arrays work pretty much like you'd expect from other languages:

```julia
myArray = [1, 2, "a", [10,8,9]]
myArray[3] == "a"
myArray[4][2] == 8
myArray[end] == [10, 8, 9]
2 ∈ myArray # \in[tab]
```

The big change here if you're coming from Python is that array indices start at 1, not 0.

---

As in python, Julia arrays can be used to hold values of different types, but after they're built they do have an element type associated with them:

```julia
eltype(myArray)
eltype([1,2,3])
push!([1,2,3],"4")
```

---

That last line returns an error because it's trying to append a string value to an array which was created with integer element type. Julia arrays are more like NumPy arrays than plain Python lists in this way.

---

### Ranges

Range objects, like `1:10` are *generators*. This means that the values are not stored explicitly but are generated on demand as the object is iterated over. For example:

```julia
for i in 1:2^60
  if i > 100
    break
  end
end
```

(Note that $2^{60}$ is [no small number](https://www.wolframalpha.com/input/?i=how+many+years+is+2%5E60+nanoseconds)!)

---

If you find yourself needing to convert a generator to an actual array, use the `collect` function:

```julia
collect(1:100)
```

---

### Slicing

Slicing in Julia requires a start and end index, and increments go in the middle:

```julia
A = rand(10,10)
A[1:5,1:2:end] # first five rows, odd-indexed columns
```
